# mantis-2024-aess-challenge

Welcome to the repository for the [Mantis team](#team) for the 2024 IEEE AESS Radar Challenge.

## Mission

Inverse Synthetic Aperture Radar, ISAR, is similar to SAR in that it employs relative motion between a radar and targets or scenes to form large synthetic apertures leading to fine azimuthal resolution. SAR and ISAR differ in that ISAR uses a stationary radar to image moving targets, while SAR uses radar motion to image (typically) stationary scenes. While SAR can typically take advantage of onboard sensors for motion estimation of the radar platform, such as a GPS or INS, ISAR must use various signal processing techniques to estimate, compensate, and take advantage of target motion.

We propose an ISAR tracking system placed onshore would act as a low-cost monitoring system for an onshore team looking to observe water traffic. The utility of this would be similar to a dashboard camera, where the operators could see collision trajectories. Another use case would be for hobbyist engaging in boat watching. The benefit of this system over an optical system is that it works even in poor visibility conditions. It also has the potential to extend into a classification system, where it identifies the type of boat being tracked.

Our proposed system would be realized as an FMCW ISAR, specifically track-mode ISAR combined with a scanning mode for sea-going vessels in a small bay or lake. To take advantage of the Phaser CN0566 for a FMCW radar, we intend on using a 500 MHz bandwidth with a LO chirp generated by the onboard ADF4159 synthesizer (swept from 12.2 to 12.7 GHz) and maintaining the example design’s 2.2 GHz IF. Transmit from the PLUTO-SDR will simply be a CW tone at the 2.2 GHz IF with 10 – 10.5 GHz chirp at the RF output. We may utilize the ADRF5019 RF SPDT switch for a left- and right-squinted transmit antenna (available ~15 dBi antennas in H-plane). Transmit antenna(s) will be vertically separated and forward of the receive array for as much direct-path isolation as possible. Receive data will be calibrated, steered, channel-summed, and packetized based on triggering from the logic interrupt of the ADF4159, and made available for archive off-device. We anticipate making changes to the logic design on the PLUTO-SDR for triggering, deterministic transmit/receive timing, and CW transmit IF as a lookup table.

We intend to use azimuthal beam steering in conjunction with FMCW range compression for target position estimation. Relatively low along-range velocity of our expected targets as well as calm sea-states should lend itself to accurate positioning as well as useful information derived from the position track, such as heading for image focusing or velocity for doppler correction.

The radar system engineer’s role is to identify and consider a large trade-space of possibilities and we find that the CN0566 kit could be used for our system despite some obvious and not-so-obvious limitations. The primary concern to consider is that for scanning in azimuth, the radar operates with a vertical polarization and that this is typically avoided for sea operations as the clutter return is higher for low grazing angles. In our use case, we will only rarely encounter significant sea-states and high-winds, therefore the polarization issue of sea clutter will be suppressed. A second limitation is the bandwidth of the receiver, both in maximal bandwidth of the PLUTO-SDR’s AD9363 as well as streaming USB data rates. Both of these bandwidth limitations cause concern, the first limiting the resolvable target velocity and the second reducing average power for a continuous or almost-continuous radar. Ultimately, for our test location, we expect clutter cross-section to be low and target cross-section to be high as well as along-range velocity to be low. We expect a successful outcome based on initial analysis and simulation.

## Team

The Mantis team is affiliated with the University of Washington Applied Physics Lab in Seattle, Washington.

### John Mower

> John Mower received his BSEE and MSEE degrees from the University of Washington, (2010 and 2012), where he studied electromagnetics and millimeter-wave remote sensing. He is currently a Senior Research Engineer at the Applied Physics Laboratory – University of Washington. His current work includes RF and acoustic communications and remote sensing. Always happy to discuss radar, radio, acoustics, and remote sensing, he can be reached at mowerj@uw.edu.

### Dylan Wesen

> Dylan Wesen is first-year mechanical engineering graduate student at the University of Washington, studying control systems, vibrations, and acoustics. While in undergrad, he assisted in the designing and testing of sonar systems with the University of Washington Applied Physics Lab. His current research explores novel array designs for remote sensing and communications.

### Nicole Pham

> Nicole Pham is a first-year electrical engineering graduate student at the University of Washington. Her background includes an electrical engineering degree with a concentration in control theory from the University of Washington in 2022 and work experience as a systems engineer in medical devices. Her research interests are in signal processing, machine learning, and FPGAs.

### Marshall Lee

> Marshall Lee is a first-year graduate student studying Mechanical Engineering at the University of Washington. His research focuses on the development of novel low-frequency acoustic transducers for marine vehicle applications. He has previously worked as a Research Engineer with the University of Washington's Applied Physics Laboratory, centering his work on fabricating sonar transducers.

### Justin Diamond

> Justin Diamond received his BSME from Californian State University, Fullerton in 2023. He is currently a first-year PhD student at the University of Washington and U.S. Department of Defense SMART Scholar focusing on the application of machine learning to ocean acoustics. He can be reached at jdiam12@uw.edu.

### Casey Culbertson

> Fourth year undergraduate student at the University of Washington studying Electrical and Computer Engineering. Interested in digital signal processing, embedded systems, and robotics. Currently an undergraduate researcher at UW's Applied Physics Laboratory.
